created blog post for Day3 (#8)
msse-2021-bootcamp/team2-blog: _posts/2021-08-11-Day-3-Post.md

---
layout: post
title: "Monte Carlo again? It's a Loop"
author: Kevin Fong
---
## Continuing on Monte Carlo Simulation

> Our primary topic today focuses on the application of the Monte Carlo simulation to generate sample configurations of particles in order understand and charcterize the statistical mechanics of a system. However as powerful as Monte Carlo simulation is, simply considering all coordinates for our configuration is very inefficient. This is because although a randomly generated configuration may be possible, configurations with high energy are simply not likely to occur. Therefore is useful to sample positions from a desired equilibrium probability distribution, where configurations that have low probabilty are generated less frequently to more realistic and revelent configurations. This is the concept of **importance sampling**.

Author: ```suggestion
Our primary topic today focuses on the application of the Monte Carlo simulation to generate sample configurations of particles in order understand and characterize the statistical mechanics of a system. However as powerful as Monte Carlo simulation is, simply considering all coordinates for our configuration is very inefficient. This is because although a randomly generated configuration may be possible, configurations with high energy are simply not likely to occur. Therefore is useful to sample positions from a desired equilibrium probability distribution, where configurations that have low probability are generated less frequently to more realistic and relevent configurations. This is the concept of **importance sampling**.
```

## Implementing the Metropolis Criteron

> To accomplish this, we are going to implement acceptance critera, specifically the *Metropolis-Hasting* algorith, to determine if we will accept a change in the position of a particle in a system considering the changes in the system energy that the positional shift imparts. The *Metropolis-Hasting* criteron we built into our model is as follows:

Author: ```suggestion
To accomplish this, we are going to implement acceptance criteria, specifically the *Metropolis-Hasting* algorithm, to determine if we will accept a change in the position of a particle in a system considering the changes in the system energy that the positional shift imparts. The *Metropolis-Hasting* criterion we built into our model is as follows:
```

$$ P_acc *P<sub>acc</sub>(m → n)* = min[1,*e*<sup>-$\Delta$U/*T*</sup>] $$

{% highlight python %}
def accept_or_reject(delta_U, beta):
    if delta_U <= 0.0:
        accept = True
    else:
        #Generate a random number on (0,1)
        random_number = random.random()
        p_acc = math.exp(-beta*delta_U)
        
        if random_number < p_acc:
            accept = True
        else:
            accept = False
    return accept
{% endhighlight %}

> As we have established our system, if a configuration is energetically more favorable, it is always accepted. If a configuration is more energetically "uphill", a number is generated randomly on (0,1) and compared to the expression *e*<sup>-$\Delta$U/*T*</sup>. If the generated number is less than expression, the criteron is not met, and the change is rejected. By this model, all configurations with lower energy or always accepted, configuration with increases in energy are accept a fraction of the time, and configurations that have great increases in energy are possible, but very unlikely.

Author: ```suggestion
As we have established our system, if a configuration is energetically more favorable, it is always accepted. If a configuration is more energetically "uphill", a number is generated randomly on (0,1) and compared to the expression *e*<sup>-$\Delta$U/*T*</sup>. If the generated number is less than expression, the criterion is not met, and the change is rejected. By this model, all configurations with lower energy or always accepted, configuration with increases in energy are accept a fraction of the time, and configurations that have great increases in energy are possible, but very unlikely.
```

> We continuted to investigate on the relation between the expression *e*<sup>-$\Delta$U/*T*</sup> and the probability density. Upon plotting the probility density against $\Delta$U from (-2,2) for different values of T the following graph was generated.

Author: ```suggestion
We continued to investigate on the relation between the expression *e*<sup>-$\Delta$U/*T*</sup> and the probability density. Upon plotting the probability density against $\Delta$U from (-2,2) for different values of T the following graph was generated.
```

<center>

<img src = '{{ "/images/MCTemp.PNG" | relative_url }}'>  

***Figure 1**: Probability density visualized against various $\Delta$U for three different temperatures*
</center>

> Upon discussing our modelings, we noted that for the domain $\Delta$U > 0, if the temperature of the system is higher, the propability density is also higher. This means that at higher temperatures, systems are more likely to enter states of higher energy. We also noted that for all $\Delta$U < 0, the generated *P<sub>acc</sub>* was above 1.0 for all temperatures. However, because this value was only compared to a generated number from (0,1), the shift is effectively accepted 100% of the time. This lines up with our assumption that all configurations of lower energy are accepted.

Author: ```suggestion
Upon discussing our models, we noted that for the domain $\Delta$U > 0, if the temperature of the system is higher, the probability density is also higher. This means that at higher temperatures, systems are more likely to enter states of higher energy. We also noted that for all $\Delta$U < 0, the generated *P<sub>acc</sub>* was above 1.0 for all temperatures. However, because this value was only compared to a generated number from (0,1), the shift is effectively accepted 100% of the time. This lines up with our assumption that all configurations of lower energy are accepted.
```

## Monte Carlo Looping

> Using a function we built to calculate the sum of all pairwise interactions experienced by a particle, accounting for cutoff and periodic boundaries, we built a Monte Carlo simulation loop to simulation the step taken by our input configuration. If a step produces a state that is accepted by our *Metropolis Criteron*, then the step is accepted, the energy is recorded in a list, and the simulation continues. Otherwise, the step is reverted back to the original configuration before the generated changes, and the Monte Carlo randomly introduces another configuration. The Monte Carlo loop we built is shown below: 

Author: ```suggestion
Using a function we built to calculate the sum of all pairwise interactions experienced by a particle, accounting for cutoff and periodic boundaries, we built a Monte Carlo simulation loop to simulation the step taken by our input configuration. If a step produces a state that is accepted by our *Metropolis Criterion*, then the step is accepted, the energy is recorded in a list, and the simulation continues. Otherwise, the step is reverted back to the original configuration before the generated changes, and the Monte Carlo randomly introduces another configuration. The Monte Carlo loop we built is shown below: 
```
